# Value Added Tax

## Curriculum Requirements

Calculate the amount payable to or receivable from the South

African Revenue Services (SARS)

Completion of the VAT control ledger account from given

information

Integration of ethical issues relating to VAT

Integration of internal audit and control processes

## Notes

### Introduction to VAT concepts

Value Added Tax (VAT) is the tax charged on goods and services supplied and is charged at the current rate (standard rate) of 15%. VAT is an important part of the income generated by the government to cover government expenditure.

#### Who has to register as a VAT Vendor?

* A person or business that supplies goods or services can register as a vendor (trader).

* All businesses with a turnover of more than R1-million must register as a vendor (trader). This is COMPULSORY REGISTRATION.

* Businesses with a turnover of less than R1-million can register if they want to. This is VOLUNTARY REGISTRATION.

#### The benefits of registering as a VAT Vendor

The business is able to claim back the amount of VAT paid on goods and services bought (VAT input).

#### Items on which VAT is not charged

Zero-rated items: Items charged at 0% VAT, but this can be changed by the government at any time. Examples are fresh fruit and vegetables, brown bread, milk, maize, rice, lentils and cooking oil.

VAT-exempt items: Items on which no VAT is charged. Examples are interest, rates, export services, educational services and childcare services.

##### VAT input

VAT input is the VAT paid by a business on the purchases of goods and services (which can be claimed back from SARS).

##### VAT output

VAT output is the VAT collected by the business on the sale of all goods and services (which needs to be paid over to SARS).

#### VAT calculations

VAT output – VAT input = amount payable to SARS

VAT inclusive calculations:

When VAT is included in an amount (VAT inclusive) the calculation for VAT will be the amount × 15/115

VAT exclusive calculations: When VAT is excluded (VAT exclusive) the calculation for VAT will be the amount × 15/100.

#### Example 1

Trendy Suppliers uses a fixed mark up of 40% on cost. The business is registered as a VAT vendor. The current VAT rate is 15%.

##### Required

Calculate the following:

1\. VAT charged by Trendy Suppliers on one dress. \[3]

2\. Selling price of one dress exclusive of VAT. \[6]

3\. VAT charged to the customer on one dress. \[3]

4\. VAT charged by Trendy Suppliers on one pair of jeans. \[3]

5\. Selling price of one pair of takkies inclusive of VAT. \[9]

##### Information

The following items were purchased during the month from Trendy Suppliers.

100 dresses @ R285 each (VAT inclusive)

80 pairs of jeans @ R180 each (VAT exclusive)

60 pairs of takkies @ R110 per pair (VAT exclusive)

##### Answers

1. AT charged by Trendy Suppliers on one dress.

R285  × 15/115  = 37.17

2\. Selling price of one dress exclusive of VAT:

Cost price = R285 – R37.17 (VAT) = R247.83

Selling price = R250 × 140/100  = R346.96

3\. VAT charged to the customer on one dress:

Selling price = R346.96 (as calculated in No 2 above)

VAT charged = R346.96 × 15/100 = R52.04

4\. VAT charged by Trendy Suppliers on one pair of jeans:

R180 × 15/100 = R27

5\. Selling price of one pair of takkies inclusive of VAT:

Cost price = R110

Selling price = R110 × 140 = R154 (exclusive of VAT)

VAT = R154 × 15/100 = R23.10

VAT inclusive amount = R154 + R21,56 = R177.10

#### Example 2

Mizi Stores, owned by Mia Mizi, is registered for VAT.

Calculate the amount of VAT to be paid over to SARS for the period ending 28 February 2011. \[17]

Information for this period ending 28 February 2011

a) Total sales (cash and credit) (VAT inclusive) R60 000

b) New computer bought (for office use) (VAT inclusive) R12 000

c) Trading stock bought (VAT exclusive) R20 000

d) Credit notes issued to customers (VAT inclusive) R 1 500

##### Answers

 , VAT Output, VAT Input

a)  Total sales: 60 000 × 15/115, = R7 826.09,

b)  New computer bought: 12 000 × 15/115, , 1 565.22

c) Trading stock bought: 20 000 × 15/100, , 3 000

d) Credit notes issued: 1 500 × 15/115, , 195.65

 , R7 826.09, R4 760.87

VAT payable to SARS:

R7 826.09 − R4 760.87 = R3 065.22

Total VAT output – Total VAT input = VAT payable to SARS

### VAT Control Account

There are different formats of completing the Input and Output VAT accounts however the correct information does end up in the VAT Control account. It is not likely you will be asked to do the Input or Output VAT account in the examination. The VAT Control Account is more likely to be asked.

Learners need to be able to complete the VAT Control account with all the relevant transactions without completing the Input VAT Control and Output VAT Control accounts.

Format of possible entries in the VAT control account

 

 				GENERAL LEDGER

Dr.			VAT CONTROL ACCOUNT (CL)	B		Cr

2014 May, 3, Debtors Control, DAJ, 56, 2014 May, 1, Bank, CRJ, 4 200

, 8, Discount allowed (claim VAT back from discount allowed amount), GJ, 8, , 2, Debtors Control, DJ, 1 400

, 12, Bad debts, GJ, 28, , 9, Discount allowed (cancel the VAT claim), GJ, 8

, 4, Bank, CPJ, 700, , 10, Drawings, GJ, 126

, 6, Creditors control, CJ, 280, , 11, Donations, GJ, 42

, 5, Petty cash, PCJ, 21, , 7, Creditors control, CAJ, 98

, 31, Balance, c/d, 4 781, , , , ,

, , , , 5 874, , , , , 5 874

, , , , , 2014 June, 1, Balance, b/d, 4 781

• VAT Control account can have a debit balance or a credit balance.

• A debit balance means that SARS owes the business money and that your Input VAT was more than your Output VAT.

• A credit balance means that the business owes SARS money

#### Schematic illustration of how all the entries from Output VAT Account and Input VAT account are recorded in the VAT Control Account

Dr				OUTPUT VAT ACCOUNT()	B	Cr

2014 May, 31, Debtors Control, DAJ, 56, May 2014, 31, Bank, CRJ, 4 200

, , Discount allowed (claim VAT back from discount allowed amount), GJ, 8, , , Debtors Control, DJ, 1 400

, , Bad debts, GJ, 28, , , Discount allowed (cancel the VAT claim), GJ, 8

, , VAT control, , , , , Drawings, GJ, 126

, , , , , , , Donations, GJ, 42

, , , , , , , , ,

• The output VAT account is a current liability.

• It is the amount owing to SARS

• The account increases on the credit side

Dr				INPUT VAT CONTROL	B		Dr

2014 May, 31, Bank, CPJ, 700, 2014 May, 31, Creditors control, CAJ, 98

, , Creditors, CJ, 280, , , , ,

, , Petty cash, PCJ, 21, , , , ,

, , , , , , , , ,

, , , , , , , , ,

• The Input VAT account is a current asset.

• It is the amount that SARS owes the business.

• The Input VAT account increases on the debit side.

Dr			VAT CONTROL ACCOUNT ()	B	Cr

2014 May, 31, Debtors Control, DAJ, 56, 2014 May, 31, Bank, CRJ, 4 200

, , Discount allowed (claim VAT back discount allowed amount), GJ, 8, , , Debtors Control, DJ, 1 400

, , Bad debts, GJ, 28, , , Discount allowed (cancel the VAT claim), GJ, 8

, , Bank, CPJ, 700, , , Drawings, GJ, 126

, , Creditors control, CJ, 280, , , Donations, GJ, 42

, , Petty cash, PCJ, 21, , , Creditors control, CAJ, 98

, , Balance, c/d, 4 781, , , , ,

, , , , 5 874, , , , , 5 874

, , , , , 2014 Jun, 1, Balance, b/d, 4 781

, , , , , , , , ,

, , , , , , , , ,

Ensure that you know all the possible transactions and how the transactions are recorded in the VAT Control account.

You can see that the following amounts from the OUTPUT VAT ACCOUNT placed in the VAT CONTROL ACCOUNT

* 56 (FROM THE DEBTORS CONTROL)
* 1 400 (From the debtors control)

You can see that the following amount from the INPUT VAT ACCOUNT are placed in  the VAT CONTROL ACCOUNT:

* 700 (From Bank)
* 98 (From the creditors control)

Take into account that the VAT CONTROL ACCOUNT is done to establish if the amount collected on behalf of SARS is more than the amount claimed from SARS

* VAT COLLECTED IS OUTPUT VAT
* VAT AMOUNT CLAIMED IS INPUT VAT

##### Explaining the 'details' column of the VAT CONTROL ACCOUNT

###### On the Dr  side

Detail, Implication, Claim or Cancel

Debtors control, when goods are returned by debtors, Cancel the output VAT claimed

Discount allowed, SARS allows business to claim back the VAT part of discount allowed when a debtors pays his account on time., Cancel output VAT

Bad debts, When a business experienced bad debts, SARS allows you to claim back the VAT part of the bad debts:, Cancel output VAT

Bank, Claim the VAT when goods are bought and paid for:, Claim back Input VAT

Creditors control, Claim the VAT when goods are bought on credit:, Claim back Input VAT

Petty Cash, Claim the VAT when goods are bought with petty cash money:, Claim back Input VAT

###### On the Cr side

Detail, Implication

Bank, Cash sales, Collect output VAT on behalf of SARS

Debtors control, Credit sales, collect output VAT on behalf of SARS

Discount allowed, Cancel of the discount claimed on the RD cheque. output VAT

Drawings, must charge VAT when owner takes stock for own use, Collect output VAT on behalf of SARS

Donations, VAT charged on donated stock, collect output VAT

Creditors control, Cancel the VAT when goods are returned back to supplier, Cancel input VAT.

## Architype Questions

### NOTE:

Some of the following questions use an old VAT rate. The current VAT in South Africa is 15%. Please update questions accordingly.

### Q1 VALUE-ADDED TAX

#### 1.1 Concepts

 Indicate whether the following statements are TRUE or FALSE. Write only 'true 'or 'false' next to the question numbers (1.1.1 to 1.1.3) in the ANSWER BOOK.

1.1.1 EFT payments by debtors should be recorded in the CRJ, only after

receiving proof of payment or an entry on the business' bank statement.

1.1.2 Output VAT is regarded as an asset.

1.1.3 VAT on bad debts will decrease VAT payable to SARS. (3 x 1) (3)

##### Answer

1.1.1 True

1.1.2 False

1.1.3 True

#### 1.2 Zaba stores

The following information relates to the financial records of Zaba Stores for the VAT period ended 31 August 2024. 15% VAT is applicable. Certain items are zero-rated.

##### INFORMATION:

Example: The owner took stock for private use, cost price R5 200

(excluding VAT).

A. Received discount of R17 250 when settling the account of the supplier.

B. Merchandise amounting to R139 200 (VAT exclusive), including zero-rated items for R9 200, were sold on credit.

C. Bought merchandise on credit from the supplier. The invoice received totalled R23 000 (VAT inclusive). Trade discount of 10% was incorrectly omitted from the invoice.

##### REQUIRED:

Analyse the transactions under the headings provided in the ANSWER BOOK.

Indicate the effect of EACH answer on the amount payable to SARS. Refer to the example completed in the ANSWER BOOK. (10)

###### Answer

No., Calculations, VAT Amount, Effect on VAT payable to SARS (increase of decrease)

E.g., 5 200 × 15/100, R780, Increase

 A., 17 250 × 15/115, 2 250, Increase/+

 B., (139 200 -9 200) × 15/100, 19 500, Increase/+

 C, 23 000 × 100/115 × 90/100 × 15/100, 2 700, Decrease/-

, ,  ,

 

### Q2 VAT

The information relates to Mphati Enterprises owned by partners John, Jacob and Jeramiah. The business is registered for VAT. They buy and sell standard and zero-rated products for cash and on credit. The standard VAT rate is 15%.

#### INFORMATION:

A. Balance: Amount due by SARS on 1 April 2024: R5 340.

B. Transactions affecting VAT calculations for April 2024:

 , VAT EXCLUSIVE, VAT AMOUNT, VAT INCLUSIVE

Purchases of stock:, 730 000, ,

 	Standard-rate products, 548 000, 82 200, 630 200

 	Zero-rated products\*, 182 200, ,

Total sales, 839 800, ,

Debtors' accounts written off, , , 31 510

Discounts received from creditors, , 4 800,

Note:  All the zero-rated goods purchased were sold at 10% below cost during a sales promotion event. This amount is included in the

total sales figure. There were no other zero-rated goods sold

during April 2024.

#### REQUIRED:

##### 2.1.1

Calculate the VAT amount on the goods sold by the business. (4)

###### 

###### Answer

(839 800 ✓ – 163 800 ✓✓) x 15% OR 125 970 – 24 570 = 101 400

##### 2.1.2

Calculate the amount payable to or receivable from SARS on

30 April 2024. (7)

###### Answer

 See 2.1.1

– 5 340 – 82 200 + 101 400 – 4 110 + 4 800 = 14 550

OR

 5 340 + 82 200 – 101 400 + 4 110 – 4 800

OR

VAT Control

5 340, 101 400\*

82 200\*, 4 800\*

4 110\*,

Bal c/d 14 550,

OR

VAT Control

101 400\*, 5 340

4 800\*, 82 200\*

 , 4 110\*

 , Balance c/d 14 550

\* Amounts may be in brackets in the opposite column (side).

, , , , , , , , ,

### Q3 VAT (9 marks)

The information relates to Nomhle Traders. The business is registered for VAT. The standard VAT rate is 15%. Nomhle also sells zero-rated goods.

#### INFORMATION:

##### A.

Harry, the clerk, calculated the VAT amount due to SARS as R55 785.

However, he did not take the following into account:

(i), VAT on goods returned to suppliers, R5 070

(ii), VAT on expenses paid, R6 240

(iii), VAT on goods taken by Nomhle for personal use ,R5 400

##### B.

VAT on discount allowed must also be taken into account. The total discount allowed amounted to R18 860.

##### C.

VAT on sales was incorrectly recorded. Certain goods with a selling price of R31 200 (excluding VAT) should have been recorded as zero-rated items.

#### REQUIRED

Calculate the VAT amount that must be paid to SARS for the VAT period ended 31 May 2022. (9)

##### Answer

55 785 + 5 070 – 6 240 + 5 400 -(18 860 × 15/115) - (31 200 × 15%) = 52 875

OR

55 785, 6 240

5 070, 2 460

5 400, 4 680

 , 52 875

66 255, 66 255

### Q4 VAT

Chuckle Traders is registered for VAT, although the annual turnover is less than R1 000 000. The standard VAT rate is 15%. The business is owned by Chuckles Berry.

#### INFORMATION:

VAT-related transactions for the period ended 30 April 2022:

Balance due by SARS on 1 April 2022, R2 600

Purchases of trading stock (excluding VAT), 59 000

Cash and credit sales (including VAT), 87 400

VAT on drawings of trading stock by Chuckles, 1 200

VAT on returns from debtors, 2 820

VAT on discount received from suppliers, 3 360

#### REQUIRED:

##### 4.1

Give ONE reason why Chuckles decided to register for VAT. (2)

###### Answer

ONE valid reason  part marks for incomplete / partial / unclear responses

* He will be able to claim VAT input from SARS / He supports or pays VAT for most of his purchases / He wants to benefit from input VAT on certain expenses or assets that he buys.
* He sells goods that are subject to standard rate VAT (15%)
* VAT collections will earn interest for a period of time
* Should his turnover exceed R1 000 000, he does not have to worry about being penalised by SARS for not complying (compulsory registration)
* He expects his business to grow and will be compelled to register.
* Responsible citizen – collect tax for SARS – improve the economy

##### 4.2

Calculate the amount of VAT that is payable to SARS for the two-month period ended 30 April 2022. (9)

###### Answer

2 600 + 8 850 – 11 400 – 1 200 + 2 820 – 3 360 = 1 690

OR

VAT CONTROL

2 600, 11 400

8 850, 1 200

2 820, 3 360

##### 4.3

Chuckles uses the money collected for VAT to pay business expenses.

He does not have sufficient cash to make the VAT payments on the due dates. What would you say to Chuckles? State TWO different/separate points. (2)

###### Answer

Any TWO valid points  could be a comment or advice;

* It is illegal / can be sued / legal action / face criminal charges / tax evasion / penalties or fines imposed by SARS, if investigated.
* It is unethical / the money does not belong to the business / agent of SARS.
* He should budget / plan / manage his expenses more effectively.
* Keep detailed records of VAT separate from business records and diarise payment dates.
* Using the money could become a bad habit / rolling of cash
* He must discontinue this practice.

### Q5 VAT (6 Marks)

Choose a term from the list below that completes each of the following statements. Write only the term next to the question number (5.1–5.6) in the ANSWER BOOK.

 List:

R500 000; direct; output; 0%; indirect; 14%; SARS; zero-rated; input; exempt; R1 000 000; 15%

#### 5.1

VAT is a / an … system of taxation.

Answer

#### 5.2

In South Africa the standard rate of VAT is currently … .

#### 5.3

VAT payable on sales is known as VAT … .

#### 5.4

Brown bread is an example of an item that is … .

#### 5.5

Items on which VAT is currently not charged are known as …

items.

#### 5.6

A business with a turnover or sales of … or more per year

should register as a VAT vendor.

### Q6: VAT

Hilda Groceries is registered for VAT. The standard VAT rate is 15% and is applied on most products.

#### INFORMATION:

##### A.

Balance due to SARS on 1 April 2021, R9 450

##### B. Transactions for April 2021:

 , AMOUNT EXCLUDING VAT, VAT AMOUNT, AMOUNT INCLUDING VAT

Total sales, 412 000, ?, 473 800

Purchases of trading stock, 230 000, ?,

Discount allowed to debtors, , 1 890,

Goods returned by customers, ?, 19 320

Bad debts recovered, , 1 140,

Drawings of trading stock by the owner, , 1 380,

#### REQUIRED:

##### 6.1

Implementation of VAT:

(a) Explain why the government implemented VAT in South Africa. State ONE point. (2)

(b) Explain why some products are zero-rated products. State ONE

point. (2)

###### Answer

(a)  Any ONE valid explanation

* Additional source of revenue for the government / on a more regular basis.
* To fund infrastructure / provision of public goods and services;
* To provide for basic/essential services for the communities;
* Finance public debts; maintain the large state owned enterprises.
* It is an indirect tax that is paid by all – easy and quick way to generate extra funds

(b)Any suitable explanation  part mark for unclear/incomplete/partial answers

* To make basic necessities affordable to indigent / poor communities / help them to live better (provide food) / they are cheaper (by the amount of VAT)
* Zero-rates items are regarded as essential items – consumed by all; should be accessible to all.

##### 6.2

Calculate the amount payable to SARS in respect of VAT for the two months ended 30 April 2021. (11)

###### Answer

9 450 + 61 800 – 34 500 – 1 890 – 2 520 + 1 140 + 1 380 = 34 860

### Q7: VAT

Amahle Traders is registered for VAT. The standard VAT rate is 15%.

#### INFORMATION:

 , EXCLUDING VAT, INCLUDING VAT, VAT AMOUNT

Invoices received from suppliers,  R78 000, R89 700, (a)

Discount received from suppliers, R12 400, , (b)

Credit notes issued to customers, , (c), R210

Invoices issued to customers, , R158 700\*, (d)

\* This includes sales for R9 200 which should have been sold at zero rate.

The bookkeeper incorrectly included VAT of R1 200 on these goods.

#### REQUIRED:

##### 7.1

Calculate the figures indicated by (a) to (d) in the table below. (9)

###### Answer

(a), 89 700 – 78 000 = 11 700

(b), 12 400 × 15% = 1 860

(c), 210 × 115/15 OR 1 400 +210 = 1 610

(d), (158 700 - 9 200) × 15/115 = 19 500

##### 7.2

The internal auditor discovered that Amahle has been underpaying the amount due to SARS in respect of VAT, at each submission date. On enquiry, Amahle stated that she used the money to pay business expenses and adjusted the payments later.

Comment on this practice and give Amahle advice. (3)

###### Answer

Comment:

* Unethical to use money not earned by the business to pay running / operational costs
* The business is an agent of SARS and must make payments timeously
* The business can be fined (penalties) for non-compliance / evasion / manipulation / deferring of payment of VAT
* It could result in a more extensive investigation for irregularities in the future
* This is rolling over of cash / evasion; which could escalate to a serious problem.

Advice

* Keep proper records / ensure that the funds are always available to make payments
* Note submission dates and plan in advance.
* Only use business funds to cover business commitments / work within the budget

### Q8: VAT (15 Marks)

#### 8.1 CONCEPTS

##### REQUIRED:

Indicate whether the following statements are TRUE or FALSE. Write only 'true'or 'false' next to the question numbers (8.1.1 to 8.1.4) in the ANSWER BOOK.

###### 8.1.1 

Output VAT is collected by a business when goods are sold.

Answer: True

&nbsp;

###### 8.1.2 

The calculation of salaries does not take VAT into account.

Answer: True

###### 8.1.3 

A credit balance on the Bank Statement indicates an unfavourable balance.

Answer: False

###### 8.1.4 

Recording bank charges separately from interest on an overdraft is an application of the materiality concept.

Answer: True

#### 8.2 VALUE-ADDED TAX (VAT) Calculations

The information relates to Longhill Traders for the VAT period ended 30 April 2019. The VAT rate of 15% applies to all goods and services. 

##### INFORMATION:

###### A. 

Amount owed to SARS on 1 April 2019, R15 890

###### B. 

VAT transactions for April 2019:

DETAILS, EXCLUDING VAT, VAT AMOUNT, INCLUDING VAT

Returns by debtors, , 1 470, 

Drawings by owner, , 3 075,

Debtors' accounts written off, 8 700, , 10 005

Total purchases (cash and credit), 224 000, , 

Total sales, , , 396 750

##### REQUIRED:

Calculate the amount receivable from or payable to SARS for VAT on 30 April 2019. Indicate whether the amount is receivable or payable. (11)

###### Answer

15 890 – 1 470 + 3 075 – 1 305 – (224 000 × 15%) + 51 750 = 34 340

OR

&nbsp;			VAT CONTROL

33 600, 15 890

1 305, 51 750

1 470, 3 075

34 340, 

70 715, 70 715

### Q9: VAT

The following information relates to Samson Traders. The VAT rate is 15%.

#### INFORMATION:

EXCLUDING VAT, VAT AMOUNT, INCLUDING VAT

Sales returns, 960, (a), 1 104

Purchase of stock, 52 600, (b),

Discount received, (c), 720,

Cash sales, , (d), 112 470\*

\* This includes zero-rated goods that should have been sold for R5 500. The bookkeeper has incorrectly included VAT of R825 on these goods. This must be corrected. 

#### REQUIRED:

##### 9.1 

Calculate the figures indicated by (a) to (d) in the table below. (10)

###### Answer

(a) 1 104 – 960 = 144

(b) 52 600 × 15% = 7 890

(c) 720 × 100/15 = 4 800

(d) \[112 470 - (5 500 + 825)] × 15/115 = 13 845

OR: (112 470 × 15/115) - 825 =  13 845

OR: 15% × (97 800 - 5 500) = 13 845

##### 9.2 

You are the internal auditor. The sole owner, Samson, used 

a business cheque to buy a new car for R460 000 including VAT. 

This car is kept at home for his wife's use. Samson says the vehicle 

must be recorded as a business asset and R60 000 must be 

recorded as a VAT input in the business' books. 

Explain what you would say to Samson. Provide TWO points. (4)

###### Answer

TWO valid points 

Expected responses for two marks: Be aware of two points within one explanation

• This is tax evasion / he is attempting to reduce the amount due to 

SARS for VAT (this is illegal and unethical)

• He will be increasing the input VAT, effectively reducing the amount due to SARS. 

• He could be fined or imprisoned because it is a criminal offence.

• Personal transactions and business transactions should be kept 

separate (Business entity concept) / Samson should pay for this out of his private bank account.

• As the car is not used for business purposes, the full amount of 

R460 000 should either be treated as drawings or a reduction of his 

capital contribution.

### Q10: VAT

The information relates to Aqua Stores for the VAT period ended 

31 July 2017. The business is owned by Nomvula Sithole. All goods sold are subject to 14% VAT.

#### INFORMATION:

##### A. 

Amount owed by SARS on 1 July 2017, R27 200.

##### B. Amounts from the Journals on 31 July 2017:

DETAILS, EXCLUDING VAT, VAT AMOUNT, INCLUDING VAT

Total sales, R495 000, R69 300, R564 300

Purchases of stock, 159 000, 22 260, 181 260

Stock returned by debtors, 15 000, ?, 17 100

Bad debts, ?, ?, 34 200

##### C. The following transactions were not taken into account:

* Stock taken by the owner, cost price R9 000 (excluding VAT).
* VAT on discount received from suppliers. Total discount received amounted to R33 630.

#### REQUIRED:

##### 10.1 

Calculate the VAT amount that is either receivable from or payable to SARS on 31 July 2017. (11)

###### Answer

27 200  – 69 300  + 22 260  + 2 100 + 4 200  – 1 260  – 4 130  = – 18 930

OR

VAT CONTROL CALCULATION

VAT INPUT, VAT OUTPUT

27 200, \*69 300

^22 260, ^1 260

\*2 100, 4 130

4 200,

18 930,

74 690, 74 690

\*Sales less returns : 69 300 - 2 100 = 67 200 two marks

^Purchases less drawings: 22 260 – 1 260 = 21 000 two marks

##### 10.2 

Nomvula has ordered goods with a marked price of R35 000 from Beta Suppliers. 

The sales director of Beta Suppliers, Jim Frow, has offered to sell 

these goods to Nomvula for R15 000, provided that they do not have to issue an invoice. 

Comment on the offer made by Jim. State TWO points. (4)

###### Answer

Any TWO valid points   part-mark for unclear / incomplete answer

* Tax evasion / buying stolen goods is illegal / unethical
* The issuing of documents is important for internal control purposes / It is fraudulent not to issue an invoice
* Unethical/illegal activity will tarnish the image of the business. 
* Discount limits must be formalised by management (otherwise fraudulent)

### Q11 VAT

#### 11.1

Choose the correct word(s) from those given in brackets. Write only the word(s) next to the question number ((a)–(d)) in the ANSWER BOOK.

##### (a) 

VAT paid to a service provider for the purchase of goods is 

regarded as (input VAT/output VAT).

###### Answer

Input VAT

##### (b) 

A (debit/credit) balance in the VAT Control Account reflects the final amount payable to SARS.

###### Answer

Credit

##### (c) 

VAT on drawings of stock will (increase/decrease) the VAT payable to SARS.

###### Answer

Increase

##### (d) 

VAT will not be accounted for by the business on payment of 

(salaries/electricity). 

###### Answer

Salaries

#### 11.2 Calculate the VAT amounts. 

Make/Draw a cross (X) in the relevant column in the ANSWER BOOK to indicate whether it will increase or decrease the amount owed to SARS. 

All items are subject to 14% VAT.

No., JOURNAL, DOCUMENT, VAT EXCLUSIVE AMOUNT, VAT INCLUSIVE AMOUNT

(a), DAJ, Credit note issued, R1 600, R1 824

(b), CRJ, Cash register tape, R8 700,

(c), CJ, Invoice received, , R10 374

##### Answer sheet

No., VAT AMOUNT, INCREASES THE AMOUNT DUE TO SARS, DECREASES THE AMOUNT DUE TO SARS

(a), , ,  

(b), , ,

(c), , ,  

###### Answer 

No., VAT AMOUNT, INCREASES THE AMOUNT DUE TO SARS, DECREASES THE AMOUNT DUE TO SARS

(a), 224, , X

(b), 1 218, X,

(c), 1 274, , X

### Q12 VAT

Thanda Traders is a VAT-registered business. All items are subject to VAT at 14%.

#### INFORMATION:

The following transactions relate to Thanda Traders for the VAT period ended 31 July 2016:

A, Balance owing by SARS on 1 July 2016, R16 800

B, Purchase of trading stock (VAT exclusive), R825 000

C, Cash and credit sales (VAT inclusive), R1 539 000

D, VAT on discount received from suppliers, R1 120

E, VAT on bad debts written off, R840

#### REQUIRED:

##### 12.1

Calculate the amount of VAT either receivable from or payable to SARS on 31 July 2016. Indicate whether this amount is receivable or payable.(9)

###### Answer

16 800 – 189 000  + 115 500  – 1 120 + 840 

= – 56 980

OR

– 16 800 + 189 000 – 115 500 + 1 120 – 840 = 56 980

OR

VAT CONTROL

16 800, 189 000

115 500, \*1 120

\*840,

56 980,

\*Can be on opposite sides in barackets. 

Columns can be reversed, as long as one method is applied consistently.

Receivable/Payable: Payable

##### 12.2

The owner wants to change the VAT amount on bad debts from R840 to R4 200. Give ONE reason why you would disagree with him.(2)

Any valid reason 

Possible responses for two marks:

• It is unethical to forward incorrect information to SARS in order to reduce the amount payable/increase amount receivable.

• It is illegal /fraudulent to provide falsified information to SARS as this will lead to fines or a jail sentence to the offender.

Possible responses for one mark:

Unethical / illegal / Fraud

### Q13: VAT

The information below relates to Creamline Traders for their two-month VAT period ended on 31 August 2016. All items are subject to 14% VAT.

#### INFORMATION:

##### A. 

Amount owed to SARS for July 2016, R14 250.

##### B. Details in respect of VAT for August 2016:

DETAILS, EXCLUDING VAT, VAT, INCLUDING VAT

Merchandise purchased/Expenses paid, R198 000, , R225 720

Goods taken by owner for personal use, , R2 940,

Returns by debtors, , R1 120,

Debtors' accounts written off, R9 500, ,

Total sales, , , R332 880

#### REQUIRED

Calculate the amount receivable from or payable to SARS for VAT on 31 August 2016. Indicate whether the amount is receivable or payable. (You may complete a VAT Control Account.) (10)

##### Answer

14 250 – 27 720 + 2 940 – 1 120 – 1 330 + 40 880 = 27 900

OR

– 14 250 + 27 720 – 2 940 + 1 120 + 1 330 – 40 880 = – 27 900

OR

Balance at beginning = 14 250

Output 40 880 – 1 120 – 1 330 = 38 430

Input 27 720 – 2 940 = (24 780)

&nbsp;Amount = 14 250 + 38 430 - 24 780 = 27 900

Receivable/Payable: Payable

### Q14: VAT

#### 14.1 VAT CONCEPTS

Change the underlined parts in the following sentences to make the statements TRUE. Write the answer next to the question number (14.1.1–14.1.3) in the ANSWER BOOK.

##### 14.1.1 

Input VAT is VAT charged to customers. (1)

###### Answer

Output VAT

##### 14.1.2 

VAT is payable to the South African Reserve Bank. (1)

###### Answer

South African Revenue Services (SARS)

##### 14.1.3 

VAT is charged at 14% on fruits and vegetables. (1)

###### Answer

&nbsp;0% (Zero)

##### 

#### 14.2 VAT CALCULATIONS

Wandile Traders is a VAT registered business. The standard rate of VAT is 14%.

##### INFORMATION:

The bookkeeper, Felix, prepared the VAT Control Account for the tax period ended 31 May 2015 and arrived at a VAT payable amount of R43 820.

However, the internal auditor has identified the following errors and omissions which must still be brought into account to calculate the correct VAT payable amount:

A., Sales invoices omitted from the Debtors' Journal including VAT, R10 830

B., Damaged goods returned to suppliers, excluding VAT, 18 600

C., VAT on sundry business expenses omitted, 6 818

D., VAT on discounts received from suppliers, 756

E., VAT on bad debts recovered, 112

F., VAT on bad debts was recorded on the wrong side of the VAT Control Account, 92

##### REQUIRED:

Calculate the correct amount of VAT the business has to pay. Show ALL workings. (12)

###### Answer

43 820  + (1 330  + 2 604 + 112 + 756 ) – (184 + 6 818) = 41 620

OR 43 820 + 1 330 + 2 604 + 112 + 756 – 184 - 6 818 

OR -43 820 - 1 330 - 2 604 - 112 - 756 + 184 + 6 818

OR

VAT CONTROL

184, 43 820

6 818, 1 330

41 620, 2 604

&nbsp;, 112

&nbsp;, 756

48 622, 48 622

, , , , , , , , ,

, , , , , , , , ,

, , , , , , , , ,

, , , , , , , , ,

, , , , , , , , ,

, , , , , , , , ,

, , , , , , , , ,

 

