## Q1 MCQ### 1.1&#x20;… is an example of long term insurance.A Medical aid fundB Vehicle insuranceC Endowment policyD Insurance on war#### AnswerC Endowment policy### 1.2Handling of conflict in the workplace involves …A firing the difficult worker.B setting a meeting for all affected parties.C shifting the blame.D lodging a grievance procedure.#### AnswerB setting a meeting for all affected parties.### 1.3Businesses must use … thinking to stay ahead of their competitors.A conventionalB routineC creativeD non-conventional#### AnswerC creative### 1.4John lost his arm during a car accident. He submitted his claim to the…A Unemployment insurance fund/UIFB Compensation for Occupational Injuries and Diseases (COIDA)C Road Accident Fund (RAF)/Road Accident Benefit Scheme (RABS)D Government Assistance Fund#### AnswerC Road Accident Fund (RAF)/Road Accident Benefit Scheme (RABS)### 1.5Pamela owns a factory that was damaged in a fire. The damage to the factory was estimatedat R300 000. She insured the factory for R780 000, but its current market value is R1,2 million.Pamela will receive … from the insurer.A R461 538B R195 000C R300 000D R780 000#### AnswerB R195 000## Q2 Word BankComplete the following statements by using the word(s) in the list below. Write only the word(s) next to the question numbers (2.1 to 2.5) in the ANSWER BOOK.transactional;  brainstorming;  transformational;  deceptive advertising;  prospectus;indemnification;  unfair advertising;  debentures;  nominal group;  security### 2.1The … technique allows an employee to silently generate ideas on his/her own and later share them with the group.#### Answernominal group### 2.2Hazel applies the …leadership theory to motivate employees with a low morale.#### Answertransformationa### 2.3The insurer applied the principle of … when the insured was compensated for losses suffered due to fire.#### Answerindemnify### 2.4Vladimir Ltd used false information to market their products. This is known as ….#### Answerunfair advertising### 2.5Mahomed Limited issued … to raise borrowed capital from the public.#### Answerdebentures## Q3 Matching Columns### COLUMN A3.1 Dividend3.2 Premium3.3 Conflict3.4 Charismatic leadership style3.5 Capital gain### COLUMN BA the amount that an insured must pay before the claim is processedB return on fixed assetsC formal disagreement between an employee and the employerD return on investment in government bondsE leaders use their personality to inspire and motivate employeesF the monthly amount that the insured must pay to the insurerG disagreement or clash of opinions in the workplaceH return on investment in sharesI leaders reward employees for meeting targetsJ return on international investments### Answer3.1 H3.2 F3.3 G3.4 E3.5 B## Q4 BUSINESS VENTURES### 4.1Name TWO examples of short-term insurance. (2)#### Answer– Property insurance– Money in transit– Theft– Burglary– Fire– Storms/Wind/Hail/Rain– Any other relevant answer related to short term insurance### 4.2Identify the principle of insurance represented by EACH statement below.#### 4.2.1Peter must prove that he will suffer a financial loss if the insured object is damaged, lost, or ceases to exist.##### AnswerInsurable interest#### 4.2.2Norma was honest and disclosed all her details when she applied for an insurance contract. (4)##### AnswerUtmost good faith### 4.3Differentiate between insurance and assurance. (4)#### AnswerInsurance; AssuranceThe principle of indemnity is applicable in the event of a loss/damage occurring.; The principle of security/certainty is applicable in the event of an occurrence of an insured event.Provides cover for a risk that may occur.; Provides cover for a risk that will occur.Applicable to short-term insurance; Applicable to long-term insuranceThe insured pays a premium to the insurer and the insurer agrees to compensate the insured in the event of damage/loss occurring. ; The insured pays a premium to the insurer and the insurer agrees to pay a specified amount of money after a fixed period has elapsed or on the death ofthe insured.### 4.4Read the scenario below and answer the questions that follow.&#x09;	BISMARCK PROPERTIES (BP)The management at Bismarck Properties wants to introduce a new product line. They requested employees to give their input during a round table discussion.#### 4.4.1Identify the leadership style applied by BP. (2)##### AnswerDemocratic leadership style#### 4.4.2Suggest situations in which the identified leadership style in QUESTION 2.4.1 can be applied in the workplace. (6)##### Answer–The leader knows his/her limitations and is open to new ideas/innovative thinking.–The leader requires a different perspective on an issue in which experienced employees could provide valuable information.–Employees are experienced/experts in their chosen fields of occupation.–Teamwork is promoted and the inputs of employees are valued/appreciated.–Any other relevant answer related to application of democratic leadership style### 4.5Discuss the role of personal attitude in successful leadership. (6)#### Answer–Positive attitude releases leadership potential.–A leader’s good/bad attitude can influence the success/failure of the business.–Leaders must know their strengths and weaknesses to apply their leadership styles effectively.–Great leaders understand that the right attitude will set the right atmosphere.–Leaders’ attitude may influence employees’/teams’ thoughts/behaviour.–Leaders should model the behaviour that they want to see in team members.–Successful leaders consider the abilities/skills of team members to allocate tasks/roles effectively–Enthusiasm produces confidence in a leader.–A positive attitude is critical for good leadership because good leaders will stay with the task regardless of difficulties/challenges.–Successful employees and leaders have a constant desire to work and achieve personal/professional success.–Leaders with a positive attitude know that there is always more to learn/space to grow.–Any other relevant answer related to the role of personal attitude in successful leadership.### 4.6Read the scenario below and answer the questions that follow.Jumbo Enterprises invested R100 000 with BASA Bank in a fixed deposit for three years. The bank offered them 12% compound interest.#### 4.6.1Elaborate on the meaning of compound interest. (4)##### Answer–Interest is calculated in every period on original/principal amount plus interest.–Interest is added to the original/principal amount and interest is earned on interest for each defined period.–As interest is added to the investment, the capital increases.–Any other relevant answer related to the meaning of compound interest#### 4.6.2Calculate the interest that Jumbo Enterprises would receive after three years. (4)##### AnswerOption 1:Year 1: R 100 000 × 0.12 × 1 = R 12 000Year 2: (R 100 000 + 12 000) × 0.12 × 1 = R 13 440Year 3: (112 000 = 13440) × 0.12 = RR15 052.80Total interest = R 12 000 + R 13 440 + R 15 052.80 = R40 492.80OROption 2:Interest = P × (1 + i)n – P = R 100 000 × (1+0.12)3 – R 100 000&#x20;= R 100 000 × (1.12)3 – R 100 000&#x20;= R40 492.80### 4.7Advise businesses on the following factors that should be considered when making investment decisions:#### 4.7.1Return on investment (4)##### Answer–Refers to the amount of money the investor gets in addition to the original investment amount.–The additional amount after tax expressed as a percentage of the original investment amount.–Will be higher if the risks involved in the investment is high.–Will be lower if the risk involved in the investment is low.–The return on investment after deduction of tax, should be higher than the general increase.–The net after-tax return should be higher than the rate of the general increases in prices.–Any other relevant answer related to the return on investment as a factor to consider when making an investment decision#### 4.7.2Risk (4)##### Answer–The risk linked to investment opportunities refers to the doubt that exist regarding the extent of any gains/losses that the investor could make.–Different investment opportunities have different risks linked to them.–Certain shares do have a low risk over an extended investment period.–Higher return on investment could be made with other shares that may be subjected higher risks.–The investor in ordinary shares have a higher risk linked to the investment because he/she will lose his/her full investment / portion of his investment should the company be declared bankrupt.–The investment in preference shares have a lower risk linked to his investment, because the investor will have rights to the company’s assets should it be declared insolvent.–Any other relevant answer related to the risk as a factor to consider when making an investment decision.## Q5 BUSINESS ROLES### 5.1Outline TWO examples of ethical behaviour in the workplace. (4)#### Answer–The business is telling the truth during a public relation crisis to overcome the business’s issue.–Companies keep promises to their employees, partners, and customers.–The business shows loyalty when they make decisions that will also benefit their staff, partners, investors, and customers.–The business shows fairness when it exercises its power justly to all its stakeholders.–The business operates within the law and other restrictions.–They ensure that the environment is not polluted in their production process.–Not engaging in illegal business practices like price fixing.–They do not make use of child labour.–Any other relevant answer related to examples of ethical behaviour### 5.2Differentiate between decision-making and problem-solving.#### AnswerDifferences between decision-making and problem-solvingDECISION-MAKING; PROBLEM-SOLVINGIt is often done by one person/ or senior management who makes it authoritarian. ; Problems can be solved by a group/ team or an individual team member which make it more inclusiveConsiders various alternatives before deciding onthe best one. ; They will generate/identify alternative solutions andevaluate it critically.This process is part of the problem-solving cycle asdecisions need to be taken in each step. ; This process of analysing a situation will identify strategies to bring about change.### 5.3Read the scenario below and answer the questions that follow.SHIVA TOOLS MANUFACTURERS (STM)The management of Shivia Tools Manufacturers is considering the possibility of adding a new product line,but would first like to get the opinions of experts on the sustainability and viability of the decision.#### 5.3.1Identify the problem-solving technique that will be used by STM. (2)##### AnswerDelphi technique#### 5.3.2Explain how STM could apply the problem-solving technique identified in QUESTION 3.3.1. (6)##### AnswerApplication of Delphi technique–The business must invite a panel of experts to research the challenge of the business.–Experts do not have to be in one place and will be contacted individually.–The business will design a questionnaire consisting of questions to get information from the experts regarding the challenge of the business.–They will request the panel to individually respond to the questionnaire–The business will summarise the responses from the experts in a feedback report.–The business will send the feedback report and if necessary, develop a second set of questions/questionnaire based on the feedback report to the panel members.–They will request panel members to provide further input/ideas on how to solve the challenge of the business.–If necessary, send a third questionnaire based on previous feedback from the second round.–Finally, the business will summarise all the feedback from the experts in a report.–Based on the report the business should choose the best solution/proposal after reaching consensus.–Any other relevant answer related to the application of the Delphi technique### 5.4Explain to Nadal Ltd how the directors could apply the following King Code principles:#### 5.4.1Transparency (4)##### Answer–Decisions/Actions must be clear to all stakeholders.–Staffing and other processes should be open and transparent.–Employees/Shareholders/Directors should be aware of the employment policies of the business.–Auditing and other reports must be accurate/ available to shareholders/employees.–Regular audits should be done to determine the effectiveness of the business.–Business deals should be conducted openly so that there is no hint/sign of dishonesty/corruption.–Businesses should give details of shareholders’ voting rights to them before/at the Annual General Meeting (AGM).–The board of directors must report on both the negative and positive impact of the business on the community/environment.–The board should ensure that the company’s ethics are effectively implemented.–Any other relevant answer related to the application of transparency as a King Code principle.#### 5.4.2Responsibility (4)##### Answer–The business/ board should develop and implement programmes that should be aimed at protecting the communities in which they operate.–The business/ board should develop remedial programmes to protect the environment for example, reduce air and water pollution.–Any other relevant answer related to the application of responsibility as a King Code principle### 5.5Discuss the positive impact of brainstorming on businesses. (6)#### Answer–Better or unique solutions and/or ideas are developed through collective contributions and will give the business acompetitive advantage.–This process enables the business to solve complex business problems.–Productivity increases if the business generates ideas which utilises time and money more effectively.–Employees are motivated as they are allowed to contribute to problem solving.–Managers will be better leaders as they will be able to manage change creatively.–Creativity may lead to new inventions which improves the general standard of living.–Any other relevant answer related to the positive impact of brainstorming.### 5.6Advise businesses on the correct procedure to deal with grievances in the workplace. (6)#### Answer–Better or unique solutions and/or ideas are developed through collective contributions and will give the business a competitive advantage.–This process enables the business to solve complex business problems.–Productivity increases if the business generates ideas which utilises time and money more effectively.–Employees are motivated as they are allowed to contribute to problem solving.–Managers will be better leaders as they will be able to manage change creatively.–Creativity may lead to new inventions which improves the general standard of living.–Any other relevant answer related to the positive impact of brainstorming.### 5.7Recommend ways on how businesses can deal with the pricing of goods in rural areas. (4)#### Answer–A business may lobby with other businesses in the area to convince government to improve infrastructure in the rural area.–Charge fair/market related prices for goods and services.–Avoid unethical business practices to attract customer loyalty.–Investigate cost-effective ways of transporting products/Hire a large truck to combine deliveries to shop-owners in the same area.–Work together with suppliers to share delivery costs to remote rural areas.–Any other relevant answer related to ways to deal with pricing in rural areas.## Q6 MISCELLANEOUS TOPICS### BUSINESS VENTURES#### 6.1Identify the insurance concept represented by EACH statement below:##### 6.1.1The insurance contract stipulates that the insured item will be replaced if it is over-insured.###### AnswerReinstatement##### 6.1.2The insured must first pay a certain amount when lodging a claim.###### AnswerExcess##### 6.1.3The insurer will not pay the full amount of loss if assets are under-insured. (6)###### AnswerAverage clause#### 6.2Read the scenario below and answer the questions that follow.&#x09;&#x09;	BLUE BERRIE BAKERY (BBB)Blue Berrie Bakery has managed to dominate a fair share in the baking industry over the years. Themanagement of BBB uses different leadership styles to manage different circumstances. The passion andpersonality of their supervisors inspire employees to adjust appropriately during times of drastic change.BBB realises the importance of leading by example and fosters strong work relationships with subordinates.##### 6.2.1Identify the leadership theories applicable to BBB. Motivate your answer by quoting from the scenario above. (9)Use the table below as a GUIDE to answer QUESTION 4.2.1.LEADERSHIP THEORIES; MOTIVATIONS1\.2\.3\.###### AnswerLEADERSHIP THEORIES; MOTIVATIONS1. Situational leadership theory; The management of BBB uses different leadership styles to manage different circumstances.2\. Transformational theory; The passion and personality of their supervisors inspire employees to adjust appropriately during times of drastic change.3\. Leaders and followers; BBB realises the importance of leading by example and fosters strong work relationships with subordinates#### 6.3Explain liquidity as a factor that should be considered when making an investment decision. (4)##### Answer–Liquidity refers to the speed with which an investment can be converted into cash.–The easier it is to convert an investment into cash, the more liquid the investment.–The more difficult it is for an investment to be converted into cash, the less liquid the investment– An amount should be invested in a type of investment that can easily be converted to cash.–Example: an investment in a savings account will be easier to convert into cash than an investment in a fixed property.–Any other relevant answer related to the meaning of liquidity as a factor to consider when making an investment.### BUSINESS ROLES#### 6.4Name FOUR causes of conflict in the workplace. (4)##### Answer– Differences in background– Ignoring procedures/rules– Lack of cooperation– Personality differences– Lack of recognition– Unfair workloads– Unrealistic deadlines– Lack of proper communication– Any other relevant answer related to the causes of conflict in the workplace.#### 6.5Read the scenario below and answer the questions that follow.&#x09;			RA PAINTS (RP)Roberto and Adie are both directors at RA Paints. Roberto promised to appoint Jamila as the new secretary if she agrees to have an intimate relationship with him. Andrew the truck driver frequently uses the business truck for private trips. Adie often uses the credit card of the business for personal expenses without consent of Roberto.##### 6.5.1Identify THREE types of unprofessional business practices displayed by the employees of RAP.Motivate your answer by quoting from the scenario above.Use the table below as a GUIDE to answer QUESTION 4.5.1.(9)UNPROFESSIONAL BUSINESS PRACTICES; MOTIVATIONS1\.2\.3\.###### AnswerUNPROFESSIONAL BUSINESS PRACTICES; MOTIVATIONS1. Sexual harassment.; Roberto promised to appoint Jamila as the new secretary if she agrees to have a relationship with him2\. Unauthorised of workplace recourses; Andrew the truck driver frequently uses the business truck for private trips3\. Unauthorised of workplace funds.; Adie often uses the credit card of the business for personal expenses without consent of Roberto#### 6.6Advise businesses how they can apply a Force Field analysis to solve complex business problems. (8)##### Answer–Describe the current situation or problem and the desired situation and write it in the middle or on top for everyone to see.–List all driving/pros and restraining/cons forces that will support and resist change.–Allocate a score to each force using a numerical scale, where 1 is weak and 5 is strong.–Weigh up the positives and negatives then decide if the project is viable.–Choose the force with the highest score as the solution.–If the project is viable, find ways to increase the forces for change.–Identify priorities and develop an action plan.–Any other relevant answer related to the application of Force field analysis## Q7 BUSINESS VENTURES (INVESTMENT: SECURITIES)Businesses may decide to invest some of their accumulated savings with listed companies on the JSE. Investment period is one of the factors which business must consider prior to the investment. Businesses can choose to invest in debentures and venture capital. Shares as a form of investment must be carefully evaluated.Write an essay on investment: securities in which you include the following aspects:• Outline the functions of the Johannesburg Security Exchange (JSE).• Explain investment period as a factor that must be considered when making an investment decision.• Discuss the following types of investment opportunities:– Debentures– Venture capital• Advise investors on the impact of shares as a form of investment.### Answer#### Introduction (2 marks)–Shares represent a portion of the company that a person/group of people own.–Investors have a range of investment opportunities to choose from.–Investment opportunities are measured against criteria for good investment.–Investors set financial goals and make an informed decision after considering various factors.–Any other relevant introduction related to the functions of the JSE/investment period/debentures and venture capital as types of investment/shares as a form of investment.#### Functions of Johannesburg Securities Exchange (JSE) (max 12)–Surplus funds accrued by financial institutions may be invested in shares.–Economic conditions in South Africa gets highlighted by activities on the JSE.–Shareholders/Prospective shareholders are kept informed about the prices of shares on a daily basis.–Bridge the gap between the public/investors and public companies that requires funding.–The market price of shares on the JSE is determined by the demand for and supply of the shares after the initial listing price.– Provides investors with small amounts of capital with the opportunity to invest in the economy of the country.– South Africa economy is given boost by new investments that the JSE promotes.– JSE provides investors and public companies with facilities to trade shares electronically.– Any other relevant answer related to the functions of the JSE.#### Investment period as a factor to consider when making an investment decision (max 10)–The Investment period refers to the duration of the investment from the initial date of investment until its termination.–The duration of investment may vary from short, middle or long-term nature depending on the individual needs of the investor.–The investor will be able to access his/her investment within a short period if the investment is of a short-term nature.–Higher returns accrue to the investor with long-term investments.–The choice of the investment period will depend on the personal circumstances of the investor.–Any other relevant answer related to period as a factor to consider when making an investment decision.#### Types of investment opportunities (max 12)##### Debentures (sub max 6)– A business acquiring funds may issue debentures to raise funds from the public/investors.– Debentures are long-term borrowings made by companies to meet certain financial obligations.–The investment is made by the investor to companies for a certain period of time linked to a certain interest rate.–The risk link to this type of investment is low, as the investor will be first in line should the business be declaredinsolvent.–Interest payments are made annually to the investor, depending on the number of debentures held by the investor.–Any other relevant answer related to debentures.##### Venture capital  (submax 6)–Investors make funds available to prospective entrepreneur to start a business and becomes a co-owner of the business.–It’s important that the investor familiarise himself with the market in which the entrepreneur will be operating before making his/her investment.–Investing in an existing business may be rewarding to an investor,  provided the investor did some research on the prevailing market conditions.–Any other relevant answer related to venture capital.#### Impact of shares as form of investment (max 10)##### Positives/ Advantages–The shareholder will be entitled to higher dividend payments, based on a high number of shares purchased.–The shares may be freely sold and purchased on the JSE.–The investors have voting rights at the Annual General Meeting of the public company.–The investors return on investment is based on the financial performance of the company.–Investors invest in shares as hedging against increases in the general price levels of goods and services.–The growth in the value of shares may provide the investors with good return of investments over a longer period.–Any other relevant answer related to the advantages of shares as form of investment.##### AND/OR##### Negatives/ Disadvantages–Dividends payable to shareholders are reliant on the company declaring a dividend based on the profit it made, if any.–Investors must rely on the goodwill of the company to declare a dividend.–Shareholders could lose their investment, should the company be declared insolvent, making the risk high.–The value of the dividends declared by the company are determined by the directors of the company.–Any other relevant answer related to the disadvantages of shares as form of investment.#### Conclusion (2)–Shares can be sold to others for a higher price than it was purchased for.–A business that is managed successfully will make a number of investments over a period of time.–The public can buy shares of listed public companies at the JSE.–Any other relevant conclusion related to the functions of the JSE/investment period/debentures and venture capital as types of investment/shares as a form of investment.### Q8 BUSINESS ROLES (TEAM PERFORMANCE AND CONFLICT MANAGEMENT)Businesses understand the importance of successful teamwork in the workplace. Team dynamics theories play an important role in improving team performance. Management must have a clear understanding of different stages of team development. They must also find ways to deal with difficult personalities in the workplace.Write an essay on team performance and conflict management in which you include the following aspects:• Outline the characteristics of successful team performance.• Describe the importance of team dynamic theories in improving team performance.• Discuss any THREE stages of team development in the workplace.• Suggest ways in which businesses can deal with the following difficult personalities in the workplace:– Complainer– Expert### Answer#### Introduction (2)–Teamwork refers to several people collaborating/working together effectively to reach a common goal.–Each team member should contribute towards the success of the team.–Successful teams go through different stages of team development to become successful/effective.–Any other relevant introduction related to the characteristics of successful teams/importance of team dynamictheories/stages of team development/dealing with the complainer and expert as difficult personalities.#### Characteristics of successful team performance (max 14)–Team members share a common goal, that every team member works towards achieving.–A group of values are shared by team members and group decisions are implemented as a collective.–Teams value the contributions of individual members and consensus are reached should differences exist.–The team environment is characterised by mutual trust/respect for each other.–Conflict is addressed immediately, and team members feel free to communicate with one another.–Meeting deadlines are important for team to achieve its goals and team members takes responsibility for such deadlines.–The needs of individual team members are not neglected by the team.–The relationships between individual team members are nurtured/encouraged.–Any other relevant answer related to the characteristics of successful team performance.#### Importance of team dynamic theories in improving team performance (max 12)–Team dynamic theories are used to explain the effectiveness and importance of teamwork.–Tasks are allocated to team members consistent with the role the team member performs within the team.–The skills/experiences/talent of the team member determines the role which will be allocated to him/her.–Individuals are given the chance to perform optimally within the team,  given the roles allocated to them.–Individuals within the team with similar skills/talents/experience  may compete for certain responsibilities/duties.–Team dynamic theories allows team leaders to know the personality type of individuals and enable them toallocate tasks more effectively.–Disagreements amongst team members may be reduced when team members specialise in their own roles/tasks.–Any other relevant answer related to the importance of team dynamic theories improving team performance.#### Stages of team development (max 12)##### Forming–This is the first stage of team development and team members are introduced to each other .–Team members observe each other’s behaviour and are polite to each other.–In this stage team members shows mutual respect and they feel comfortable.–This stage is characterised by focussing on the routine and administrative details of the goals of the team–Any other relevant answer related to the forming stage##### Storming– Conflict occurs amongst team members after the forming stage is concluded.–Team members with different ideas exchange these ideas, which leads to conflict.–Team members opposes the ideas of other team members that does not correspond with their ideas.–Power struggles occur within the group,  and the dominant team members takes charge of the team.–At certain times the storming stage are often resolved quickly, and if it’s not resolved the team won’t move further than this stage.–Any other relevant answer related to the storming stage.##### Norming/Settling/reconciliation– It is important that the conflict gets resolved as soon as possible, to allow the team to move to the norming stage.–Team members compromise their own ideas and accept that they need to work in harmony with other team members.–The duties and responsibilities of all the team members are clearly set out and agreed to–The processes involved in achieving the goals are adhered to and team members appreciate the contributions of fellow team members.–Individual team members collectively work towards the goals of the team.–Any conflict that happens during this stage is addressed in a professional/collegial manner.–Any other relevant answer related to the norming stage##### Performing/Working as a team towards a goal– The team is functioning optimally towards achieving the organisations goals.– The leader trust the team and avoids interfering in the operations of the team.– Processes and structures are in place to ensure the smooth execution of the job.– Leaders delegate and oversee the processes and procedures.– All team members demonstrate competence are able to work on their own and provide valuable input in decisionmaking.– Any other relevant answer related to the performing stage.##### Adjourning/Mourning– This stage of team development is characterised by the ending of the project, because the goals were achieved.– Some team members adjust poorly to the team breaking up,  because they’ll find it difficult to work on their own again.– All tasks must be completed before the team finally breaks up and individual members go their separate ways.– Any other relevant answer related to the adjourning/mourning stage.#### Ways to deal with difficult people in the workplace (max 8)##### Complainer (sub max 4)– Listen to the complaints but don’t acknowledge them by nodding your head.– Interrupt the complainer after a while and proceed with strategies to deal with the issues raised.– Any other relevant answer related on ways how to deal with a complainer##### Expert (sub max 4)– Listen to the employee, but let him/her know that you are in control of the situation.– Let him/her know that you value their inputs, but that you’ll also consider other alternatives.– Refrain from attacking their views, which will draw you into a confrontation with him/her.– Any other relevant answer related to ways how to deal with an expert.#### Conclusion (2)– Effective team work will contribute to achieving goals and improve productivity.– Teams generally take longer to arrive at a decision.– If managers deal effective with difficult people in the workplace, productivity will increase in the business.– Managers must take team dynamic theories into account to improve results in the business.– Any other relevant conclusion related to the characteristics of successful teams/importance of team dynamictheories/stages of team development/dealing with the complainer and expert as difficult personalities.