### Q1 Multiple Question (10 marks)

#### 1.1 

Crime that may discourage establishment of new businesses. 

A. Corruption 

B. Dumping  

C. Unemployment 

D. Tax 

##### Answer

&#x20;

#### 1.2 

Unfairness where some groups in society have more money and opportunities 

and power than others. 

A. Inclusivity 

B. Empowerment 

C. Skills development 

D. Inequality 

##### Answer

&#x20;

#### 1.3 

…are companies registered to provide a service and funded by donations. 

A. Non-profit company 

B. Public company 

C. Close corporation 

D. Private company 

##### Answer

&#x20;

#### 1.4 

An entrepreneur’s ability face unforeseen situations that may affect the 

business negatively 

A. Creativity 

B. organizational skills 

C. risk-taking 

D. passion 

##### Answer

&#x20;

#### 1.5 

One of these is not a factor to consider when establishing a form of ownership 

A. Capacity  

B. Taxation 

C. Legislation 

D. Equity 

##### Answer

### Q2 Word Bank (10 marks)

Complete the following statements by using the words provided in the list below. 

Write only the word(s) next to the question numbers (2.1 to 2.5) in the ANSWER BOOK. 

&#x20;

form of ownership; social investment; capital; stress management; interest; personal liability company; HIV/AIDS; social responsibility; state owned company; business management  

&#x20;

#### 2.1 

Finances or assets needed to start and the business…

##### &#x20;

#### 2.2 

Wellness programmes and provision of antiretroviral…  

#### 2.3 

Directors of … are severally liable for debts and liabilities of the company. 

#### 2.4  

… also considers the impact of the business on employees. 

#### 2.5 

The way in which a business is legally structured and managed…

### Q3 BUSINESS VENTURES (ENTREPRENEURIAL QUALITIES) 

&#x20;

#### 3.1 

Read the scenario below and answer questions that follow: 

&#x09;		REFILOE’S CONSTRUCTION 

Refiloe is the founder of Refiloe Construction Company. The success of her company can be attributed to her determination to succeed despite all challenges. 

She adapted to the changing environment and had to believe in herself more than ever before. 

##### 

##### 3.1.1 

Define the meaning of an entrepreneur:               (2) 

##### 3.1.2 

Identify THREE examples of qualities of an entrepreneur from the scenario.                   (3)

&#x20;

#### 3.2

Discuss the following entrepreneurial qualities: 

* Perseverance                   (2) 
* Passion   (2)

#### 3.3 

Give THREE types of cooperatives.                (3) 

&#x20;

#### 3.4 

Read the scenario below and answer questions that follow: 

&#x09;Will the Cahora Bassa dam deal still be negotiated? 

&#x20;In the 1960s, Portugal and South Africa built the Cahora Bassa Dam along the Zambezi River. South Africa provided the start -up capital, put together the consortium that would build the dam, and continues to purchase the bulk of electricity generated by this hydroelectric facility. 

##### 3.4.1 

Identify the form of ownership responsible for provision of electricity in  South Africa.                   (2) 

##### 3.4.2 

Discuss THREE advantages of this form of ownership.            (6)

### Q4 BUSINESS ROLES (SOCIO-ECONOMIC ISSUES) 

&#x20;

#### 4.1 

State socio-economic issues described below: 

##### 4.1.1 

Producing imitated and packed goods to resemble the original goods.        (2)

&#x20;

##### 4.1.2 

The state of job-seeking people in the economically active population.       (2) 

#### 4.2 

Explain the purpose of inclusivity in the workplace.              (5)

#### 4.3 

Read the scenario below and answer questions that follow: 

&#x20;

&#x09;		IMBHOKOQO Pty(Ltd) 

Imbhokoqo is a company which specializes in designer clothing and cosmetics, imported from all over the world. It is involved in training the youth in fashion design. It sponsors the local soup kitchen and provides sanitary towels to farm schools.  

&#x20;

##### 4.3.1 

Define the meaning of ‘Social Responsibility’.             (2) 

##### 4.3.2 

Identify THREE examples of CSR projects from the scenario.  (3) 

&#x20;

##### 4.3.3 

Suggest other Initiatives that Imbhokoqo can take to address socio-economic issues.  (6)  

### Q5 MISCELLANEOUS 

&#x20;

#### 5.1 

Classify following explanations according to appropriate company:  

make a tick on the appropriate block. 

&#x20;, Form of ownership\[State-owned company, Private company, Public company, Personal Liability company]

a) Free transfer of shares, , , ,

b) South African Airways, , , ,

c) No prospectus, , , ,

d) Directors responsible for debts, , , ,

&#x20;

#### 5.2 

Discuss THREE characteristics of a sole-trader.    (6) 

#### 5.3 

Discuss the impact of inequality and poverty on businesses. (4)

&#x20;

#### 5.4 

Suggest efforts the business can follow to create an inclusive workforce.  (6)

### Q6 BUSINESS ENVIRONMENTS (SOCIO-ECONOMIC ISSUES) (40 Marks)

&#x20;

"Gambling; piracy; crime and strikes are but just some of the issues which impacts negatively on the business" 

&#x20;

Based on the statement above discuss the following: 

&#x20;

* Explain the meaning of socio-economic issues 
* Discuss the impact of crime and strikes on the business 
* Outline different types of gambling and explain their impact on the business. 
* Recommend solutions to piracy for the business.  

### Q7 BUSINESS VENTURES (FORMS OF OWNERSHIP) (40 Marks)

"The business cannot be established without proper consideration of factors that assist the entrepreneur to decide on the suitable form of ownership. "

Bearing the above statement in mind, write detailed essay on the following aspects: 

&#x20;

* Discuss continuity and liabilities as factors that must be considered when choosing the form of ownership. 
* Distinguish between sole trader and private company. 
* Justify the effectiveness of non-profit company as the best form of ownership 
* Evaluate the impact of partnership as a form of ownership. 

