# Activity 19 (Analysis of reconciliation transactions)On the 30 August 2010, the accountant of Mabunda Stores compared the balances of the debtors control account and the creditors control account in the General Ledger with the total of the debtors’ and creditors’ lists.## RequiredUse the columns on the answer sheet to indicate how the errors and omissions must be recorded to reconcile the control accounts with debtors’ and creditors’ lists.## InformationThe following errors and omissions need to be corrected.1 A credit invoice for goods sold to T. Tanli was recorded twice in the subsidiary book, and also posted twice, R200.2 The total of the Debtors Journal was undercast by R240 and the Creditors Journal was overcast by R180.3 A credit note for R544 was recorded in the Creditors Allowances Journal as R54 and posted accordingly.4 The amount received from C. Maduna was posted to the credit side of the account of C. Maduma, R144.5 An amount of R87 in the Debtors Allowances Journal was incorrectly posted to debtor N. Zungu’s account as R187.6 The totals of the discount allowed column, R300 and debtors control column, R18 644, in the Cash Receipts Journal have both been posted to the debtors control account.7 A credit invoice for goods purchased from Kubeka Suppliers was treated as a credit note, R99.8 An amount of R180 in the debtors control column in the Cash Receipts Journal was not posted.9 A creditor with a debit balance of R40 was included in the list of debtors.10 A credit balance of R322 on the account of S. Sechele is an amount paid in by him after his account had been written off as irrecoverable. This amount was included in the debtors control column in the Cash Receipts Journal.## Answer sheetNote that Debit, Credit is nested in each of the 4 major columns.No., Debtors control\[Debit, Credit], Debtors list\[Debit, Credit], Creditors control\[Debit, Credit], Creditors list\[Debit, Credit]1, , , , , , , ,2, , , , , , , ,3, , , , , , , ,4, , , , , , , ,5, , , , , , , ,6, , , , , , , ,7, , , , , , , ,8, , , , , , , ,9, , , , , , , ,10, , , , , , , ,## Answer:No., Debtors control\[Debit, Credit], Debtors list\[Debit, Credit], Creditors control\[Debit, Credit], Creditors list\[Debit, Credit]1, , 200, , 200, , , ,2, 240, , , , 180, , ,3, , , , , 490, , 490,4, 144, 144, 144, 144, , , ,5, , , 100, , , , ,6, 300, , , , , , ,7, , , , , , , ,1988, , , , 180, , , ,9, , , , 40, , , ,10, 322, , 322, , , , ,